
3 of 24 DOCUMENTS

 Go to Supreme Court Opinion       Go To Oral Argument Transcript

View Original Source Image of This Document

           SONNY PERDUE, Governor of Georgia, et al., Petitioners, v.
                KENNY A., By His Next Friend Linda Winn, et al.,
                                  Respondents.

                                   No. 08-970

                       SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

            2008 U.S. Briefs 970; 2009 U.S. S. Ct. Briefs LEXIS 807

                                August 28, 2009

          On Writ of Certiorari to the United States Court of Appeals
                           for the Eleventh Circuit.

                                  Amicus Brief

COUNSEL:  [**1]  JOSHUA CIVIN, KRISTEN CLARKE, NAACP LEGAL DEFENSE & EDUCATIONAL
FUND, INC., 1444 I Street, NW, 10th Fl., Washington, DC 20005, (202) 682-1300.

JOHN PAYTON, Director-Counsel, DEBO P. ADEGBILE, Counsel of Record, MATTHEW
COLANGELO, KIMBERLY LIU, NAACP LEGAL DEFENSE & EDUCATIONAL FUND, INC., 99 Hudson
Street, 16th Fl., New York, NY 10013, (212) 965-2200.

[*i]  QUESTION PRESENTED

   Can an attorney's fees award under a federal fee-shifting statute ever be
enhanced based on quality of performance and results obtained?  [*ii]

INTERESTS:  [*1]  INTEREST OF AMICUS CURIAE n1


n1 Pursuant to Rule 37.6, counsel for the amicus states that no counsel for a
party authored this brief in whole or in part, and that no person other than the
amicus, its members, or its counsel made a monetary contribution to the
preparation or submission of this brief. Letters of consent from the parties are
lodged with the Clerk of the Court pursuant to Rule 37.3.

   The NAACP Legal Defense & Educational Fund, Inc. (LDF) is a non-profit legal
organization that has assisted African Americans and other people of color in
securing their civil and constitutional rights for more than six decades. LDF
litigated key cases that developed the legal framework for attorney's fees
awards in civil rights cases, and that were incorporated into the legislative
history of the Civil Rights Attorney's Fees Awards Act of 1976, Pub. L. No.
94-559, 90 Stat. 2641 (codified as amended at 42 U.S.C. § 1988). See, e.g.,
Newman v. Piggie Park Enters., Inc., 390 U.S. 400 (1968); Johnson v. Georgia
Highway Express, Inc., 488 F.2d 714 (5th Cir. 1974); Swann v.
Charlotte-Mecklenburg Bd. of Educ., 66 F.R.D. 483 (W.D.N.C. 1975); see also
Awarding of Attorneys' Fees: Hearings Before the Subcomm. on Courts, Civil
Liberties and the Admin. of Justice of the H. Comm. on the Judiciary, 94th Cong.
54 (1975) (statement of Rep. Drinan) (citing LDF's reliance on the availability
of attorney's fees awards to litigate civil rights cases).

   LDF has also participated as an amicus in cases before this Court
interpreting the scope of reasonable attorney's fees provisions in various
federal statutes. See, e.g., City of Burlington v. Dague, 505 U.S. 557 (1992);
Blum v. Stenson, 465 U.S. 886 (1984); Hensley v. Eckerhart, 461 U.S. 424 (1983).

TITLE: BRIEF OF AMICUS CURIAE NAACP LEGAL DEFENSE & EDUCATIONAL FUND, INC. IN
SUPPORT OF RESPONDENTS

[*2]  SUMMARY OF ARGUMENT

   Effective civil rights laws are vital to the health of our democracy. But
even the best statute is essentially a dead letter without vigorous enforcement.
Congress was well aware of the dangers of underenforcement when it passed the
Civil Rights Attorney's Fees Awards Act of 1976, Pub. L. No. 94-559, 90 Stat.
2641 (codified as amended at 42 U.S.C. § 1988) [**9]  [hereinafter Section
1988]. It was Congress's reasoned determination that robust attorney's fees
awards, including enhancements for extraordinary performance and results, would
provide a muchneeded catalyst to encourage citizens to pursue the types of
litigation that most boldly defend and enhance civil rights. This case presents
no occasion for the Court to displace Congress's well-considered judgment.

   Section 1988 was Congress's swift and decisive response to a decision of this
Court that prohibited attorney's fees awards absent express statutory
authorization. See Alyeska Pipeline Serv. Co. v. Wilderness Soc'y, 421 U.S. 240
(1975). A little over a year after Alyeska was decided, Congress overcame a
Senate filibuster and enacted Section 1988, which authorizes "a reasonable
attorney's fee" for prevailing litigants under an array of civil rights laws,
including 42 U.S.C. §§ 1981, 1982, and 1983.

   This brief supplements Respondents' analysis of Section 1988's legislative
history in three distinctive ways. First, Section 1988 does more than simply
provide access to the courts for plaintiffs seeking redress for individual
wrongs. Congress [**10]  also sought to promote vigorous and effective civil
rights enforcement.  [*3]  To achieve this broad-reaching objective, Congress
adopted an expansive view of what constitutes a reasonable attorney's fee. In no
way did Congress intend to restrict fees awards to the "lodestar" calculation
that results from multiplying the number of hours an attorney worked by a
reasonable rate for his or her services. Rather, Congress gave clear direction
that enhancements above the lodestar are permitted in exceptional circumstances
for extraordinary performance and results that forcefully advance civil rights.

   Second, the legislative history emphasizes the symmetry between Section 1988
and Congress's simultaneous enactment of a statute that filled another gap
created by Alyeska. The Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements Act of 1976,
Pub. L. No. 94-435, § 302(3), 90 Stat. 1396 (codified as amended at 15 U.S.C. §
26) [hereinafter Antitrust Improvements Act], provided for reasonable attorney's
fees in certain antitrust cases. Congress determined that courts should have the
same power to grant enhancements to promote vigorous civil rights enforcement
[**11]  and to encourage the efficacious implementation of antitrust policy.

   Third, in 1976, when Congress was considering Section 1988, it rejected an
amendment that would have done exactly what Petitioners urge. It is an
established principle of statutory construction that Congress does not intend
sub silentio to enact statutory language that it has earlier discarded.
Moreover, subsequent Congresses have confirmed the importance of enhancements by
repeatedly rebuffing legislation to curtail or ban them.

    [*4]  After highlighting these distinctive features of the legislative
history, this brief surveys cases decided after the enactment of Section 1988.
Contrary to the assertions of Petitioners and their amici, courts have proved
adept at crafting workable criteria for determining the rare circumstances in
which enhancements for extraordinary performance and results are warranted to
promote vigorous enforcement of civil rights. Courts have found it reasonable to
enhance fees in cases that set important precedents or otherwise pave the way
for future federal and private enforcement, recognizing that these cases require
the greatest degree of ingenuity, and thus the number of hours [**12]  an
attorney works are less likely to reflect the true value of his or her services.
In addition, courts have granted enhancements in cases that do not merely remedy
violations of an individual's rights, but provide broad-reaching relief that
roots out entrenched discrimination or eradicates systemic inequities.

ARGUMENT

I. Section 1988's legislative history demonstrates that Congress intended to
permit enhancements for extraordinary performance and results that vindicate
civil rights.

   This Court has repeatedly relied upon legislative history in the
interpretation of statutory terms that are not clear on their face. The
"reasonable attorney's fee" language in Section 1988 is no exception. See, e.g.,
Blum v. Stenson, 465 U.S. 886, 893-97 (1984). This section highlights three
distinctive aspects of Section 1988's legislative history that are  [*5]  not
addressed in Respondents' brief. Close review of the legislative history
confirms that the availability of enhancements was part of a deliberate
congressional determination that civil rights enforcement should be vigorous,
incentivized, and compensated on terms no less favorable than in other
substantive [**13]  areas where enhancements have long been granted to further
key national priorities.

A. It was Congress's well-considered judgment that Section 1988 should provide
significant incentives for vigorous and effective civil rights enforcement.

   1. While Section 1988 ultimately passed by broad margins in both the House
and Senate, see 122 Cong. Rec. 33315, 35130 (1976), the process preceding the
vote reveals significant deliberation and intense debate--an illustration of
Congress's carefully considered judgment. Indeed, proponents had to devote
extraordinary resources to bring the legislation to a vote. The Senate approved
Section 1988 after a cloture vote ended an unusually hard-fought filibuster. Id.
at 32172. In the House, proponents utilized a procedural maneuver reserved for
"emergency" legislation to ensure prompt consideration. Id. at 35118, 35119.

   Congress thought these emergency measures were necessary because this Court's
decision in Alyeska "dealt a serious blow to the effective enforcement of our
civil rights laws." 122 Cong. Rec. 31471 (1976) (statement of Sen. Mathias).
Fresh from the battles of the initial decades of modern civil rights
enforcement,  [**14]  Congress intended its authorization of reasonable
attorney's fees awards to do more than  [*6]  simply provide access to the
courts for those seeking redress for individual wrongs. It provided for robust
attorney's fees awards as a catalyst for citizens to pursue "vigorous
enforcement" of civil rights laws. S. Rep. No. 94-1011, at 4 (1976), as
reprinted in 1976 U.S.C.C.A.N. 5908, 5911 [hereinafter Senate Report]; H.R. Rep.
No. 94-1558, at 2-3 (1976) [hereinafter House Report].

   Senator Tunney, the Senate bill's sponsor, reminded his colleagues that "[w]e
cannot hope for vigorous enforcement of our civil rights laws unless we . . .
remove the burden from the shoulders of the plaintiff seeking to vindicate the
public right." 122 Cong. Rec. 33314 (1976) (emphasis added) (internal quotation
marks omitted); see also id. at 31472 (statement of Sen. Kennedy) (Section 1988
will "assure all the citizens of this Nation . . . that Congress firmly intends
that all our civil rights laws be vigorously enforced." (emphasis added)). n2 A
key House proponent aptly summed up Section 1988's broadreaching objectives: "A
vote for the bill is a vote for effective civil rights laws.  [**15]  " Id. at
35129 (statement of Rep. Seiberling).

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


   n2 References to the importance of "vigorous enforcement" also feature
prominently in subcommittee hearings. See, e.g., Awarding of Attorneys' Fees:
Hearings Before the Subcomm. on Courts, Civil Liberties and the Admin. of
Justice of the H. Comm. on the Judiciary, 94th Cong. 85 (1975) (statement of
Armand Derfner, Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights); id. at 122 (statement of
Charles R. Halpern, Executive Director, Council for Public Interest Law); id. at
285 (recommendation of American Bar Association).


- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   2. To achieve these far-reaching objectives, Congress repeatedly recognized
the multi-factor test set  [*7]  forth in a pre-Alyeska employment
discrimination case litigated by amicus LDF-- Johnson v. Georgia Highway
Express, Inc., 488 F.2d 714 (5th Cir. 1974)--as establishing "[t]he appropriate
standards" for determining reasonable attorney's fees awards. Senate Report 6;
see also House Report 8. The Senate Judiciary Committee [**16]  further
explained that the Johnson factors "are correctly applied" in three cases:
Stanford Daily v. Zurcher, 64 F.R.D. 680 (N.D. Cal. 1974); Davis v. County of
Los Angeles, No. 73-63- WPG, 1974 WL 180 (C.D. Cal. June 5, 1974); and Swann v.
Charlotte-Mecklenburg Board of Education, 66 F.R.D. 483 (W.D.N.C. 1975). See
Senate Report 6.

   Congress deliberately chose this trilogy to emphasize its commitment to
vigorous and effective civil rights enforcement. As detailed in Part II.A.3
infra, all three cases substantially advanced the state of civil rights law.
Davis and Stanford Daily expressly granted enhancements for extraordinary
performance and results, and the fees awards in all three cases were among the
most robust of the pre-Alyeska era. See Legal Fees: Hearings Before the Subcomm.
on Representation of Citizen Interests of the S. Comm. on the Judiciary, 93rd
Cong. 862-1107 (1974) (collecting cases). Because these cases are particularly
instructive with respect to the question presented, they merit the same close
attention that the Court has devoted to them in prior interpretations of Section
1988. See,  [**17]   e.g., Blanchard v. Bergeron, 489 U.S. 87, 92-93 (1989);
City of Riverside v. Rivera, 477 U.S. 561, 576 (1986) (plurality opinion); Blum,
465 U.S. at 893-95; Hensley v. Eckerhart, 461 U.S. 424, 430-32 (1983).

    [*8]  The legislative history thus refutes Petitioners' assertions that
enhancements are unnecessary to achieve the "the clear purpose" of Section 1988.
Pet. Br. 19-20. Their view that Section 1988 simply ensures that aggrieved
individuals are able to attract the services of "competent counsel" is too
narrow. Id. at 20. While Congress sought to eliminate unfairness to individuals
deprived of their rights who do not have resources to hire an attorney, it also
endorsed "the broadest and most effective remedies available to achieve the
goals of our civil rights laws." Senate Report 3. Enhanced fees awards for
extraordinary representation and results further Congress's broad-reaching
objectives by encouraging attorneys to seek cases that will not simply apply
well-settled precedents to remedy garden-variety statutory or constitutional
violations, but that will also advance the state of civil rights law, dismantle
[**18]  entrenched institutional discrimination, or eradicate other systemic
injustices.

B. Congress intended for the same standards to govern civil rights fees awards
as apply in antitrust cases, where courts have long awarded enhancements for
extraordinary performance and results.

   Enhancements for extraordinary performance and results are also consistent
with Congress's intent that "the amount of fees awarded under [Section 1988] be
governed by the same standards which prevail in other types of equally complex
Federal litigation, such as antitrust cases." Senate Report 6. Respondents aptly
demonstrate that, during the period preceding enactment of Section 1988, courts
endorsed enhancements for extroardinary performance  [*9]  and results in
antitrust and securities cases, especially those with substantial public
benefits. See Respondents' Br. 27-31 & n.3 (collecting cases).

   For this reason, it is particularly significant that, on the day before
Section 1988 passed the House, President Ford signed into law the Antitrust
Improvements Act. Like Section 1988, the Antitrust Improvements Act filled a
void created by Alyeska. As pertinent here, it authorized the award of
reasonable [**19]  attorney's fees for antitrust claims for injunctive relief.
n3 H.R. Rep. No. 94-499(I), at 18-20 (1976), as reprinted in 1976 U.S.C.C.A.N.
2572, 2588-90. As with Section 1988, Congress concluded that reasonable
attorney's fees in antitrust cases seeking injunctive relief were "an effective
enforcement tool" to advance an important congressional policy objective. Id. at
2589.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


   n3 Congress had previously authorized the award of reasonable attorney's fees
for damages claims in antitrust cases. Clayton Antitrust Act, ch. 323, 38 Stat.
731 (1914) (codified as amended at 15 U.S.C. § 15).


- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   In the House floor debates regarding Section 1988, Representative Seiberling
expressly noted parallels to the Antitrust Improvements Act and observed that
"certainly the laws protecting people's civil and constitutional rights are at
least as important as are antitrust laws." 122 Cong. Rec. 35118 (1976).

   Section 1988's legislative history also contains express reference to Arenson
v. Board of Trade, 372 F. Supp. 1349 (N.D. Ill. 1974), [**20]  a significant
pre-Alyeska antitrust case that awarded an enhancement for extraordinary
performance and results. See  [*10]  Awarding of Attorneys' Fees: Hearings
Before the Subcomm. on Courts, Civil Liberties and the Admin. of Justice of the
H. Comm. on the Judiciary, 94th Cong. 421 (1975) (reprinting law review article
discussing Arenson); Respondent's Br. 27 (citing Arenson).

   The enhancement in Arenson was explicitly geared to ensuring vigorous
enforcement of key congressional policy objectives in the antitrust context. The
district court recognized "the social effect of th[e] litigation," 372 F. Supp.
at 1352, noting that: "[a]n entire industry has been restructured" as a result
of the suit, id.; "[t]his achievement could well be of great instructive
precedent in subsequent litigation," id. at 1358; and the litigation was "fought
out at a legal frontier where no lawyer knew all the answers," with plaintiffs'
attorneys "blazing new legal trails," id. at 1352-53. The court further observed
that "[t]he value of a lawyer's services is not merely measured by time or
labor" because "[t]he practice of [**21]  law is an art in which success depends
as much as in any other art on the application of imagination--and sometimes
inspiration--to the subject matter." Id. at 1356.

   The enactment of the Antitrust Improvements Act nearly simultaneously with
Section 1988 underscores Congress's considered judgment that Section 1988 should
permit courts to award adjustments above the lodestar for vigorous enforcement
of federal civil rights laws using the same standards applied in other complex
federal litigation, particularly antitrust cases. It would be wholly
inconsistent with Congress's intent for courts to remain free to grant
enhancements for successful antitrust litigation but  [*11]  not for vigorous
civil rights enforcement, which Congress has long considered an equally critical
national priority.

C. Congress has repeatedly rejected proposals that would have expressly
prohibited enhancements.

   1. In 1976, as Congress was debating Section 1988, it considered and rejected
alternative language that would have made explicit the factors for setting a
fees award and would have precluded enhancements for extraordinary performance
and results. 122 Cong. Rec. 31477 (Amendment [**22]  470 to S. 2278).
Specifically, an amendment from Senator Helms proposed that an attorney's fees
award be "based upon the actual time expended by [an] attorney or agent and his
or her staff in advising or representing a party (at prevailing rates for such
services, including any reasonable risk factor component)." Id. at 31477-78.

   After careful consideration, Congress rejected the Helms amendment. Id. at
31480-81. Instead, Congress adopted the "reasonable attorney's fee" language
that it had previously used to ensure vigorous and effective enforcement of
other civil rights statutes, including Titles II and VII of the Civil Rights Act
of 1964. See 42 U.S.C. §§ 2000a-3(b), 2000e-5(k); see also Christiansburg
Garment Co. v. EEOC, 434 U.S. 412, 422 (1978) (interpreting the attorney's fees
provision of Title VII so as not to "undercut the efforts of Congress to promote
the vigorous enforcement" of that key employment antidiscrimination statute).
The rejection of the Helms amendment is significant because, as this Court has
held, "[f]ew  [*12]  principles of statutory construction are more compelling
[**23]  than the proposition that Congress does not intend sub silentio to enact
statutory language that it has earlier discarded in favor of other language."
INS v. Cardoza-Fonseca, 480 U.S. 421, 442-43 (1987) (quoting Nachman Corp. v.
Pension Benefit Guar. Corp., 446 U.S. 359, 392-93 (1980) (Stewart, J.,
dissenting)).

   Petitioners' claim that "the plain statutory language" does not "permit[] any
type of enhancement to an attorney's fee award," Pet. Br. 13, is therefore
incorrect. Section 1988 adopted the "reasonable attorney's fee" language that
Congress had long used in prior statutes authorizing fee-shifting for civil
rights enforcement, because that language had already been interpreted in a
manner that Congress sought to affirm. See Senate Report 4 ("It is intended that
the standards for awarding fees be generally the same as under the fee
provisions of the 1964 Civil Rights Act."); Blum, 465 U.S. at 894 n.10
("Congress was legislating in light of experience when it enacted the 1976 fee
statute."). Indeed, Congress deliberately chose to reinstate the courtcreated
regime employed prior to Alyeska, which permitted courts [**24]  to enhance fee
awards for extraordinary performance and results in appropriate circumstances.
See Crawford Fitting Co. v. J.T. Gibbons, Inc., 482 U.S. 437, 442 (1987) ("It is
therefore clear that when Congress meant to set a limit on fees, it knew how to
do so.").

   2. Post-enactment legislative activity confirms that Congress did not intend
for Section 1988 to preclude enhancements for extraordinary performance and
results. Congress has adopted several amendments  [*13]  to expand and revise
Section 1988's coverage. See, e.g., Federal Courts Improvement Act of 1996, Pub.
L. No. 104-317, § 309(b), 110 Stat. 3853; Religious Freedom Restoration Act of
1993, Pub. L. No. 103-141, § 4(a), 107 Stat. 1489. Yet Congress has never acted
to restrict enhancements for extraordinary performance and results, even though
courts, as discussed in Part II.A infra, have granted such enhancements during
the decades since Section 1988 was enacted. See Herman & MacLean v. Huddleston,
459 U.S. 375, 385-86 (1983) (holding that Congress can be assumed to have
endorsed--by failing to overturn--a "well-established judicial interpretation").
[**25]

   Moreover, Congress has repeatedly rejected proposals to proscribe
enhancements to attorney's fees awards. For instance, as Respondents point out,
the Senate considered but opted not to act on legislation introduced in 1984
that would have amended Section 1988 to prohibit enhancements. See Legal Fees
Equity Act, S. 2802, 98th Cong. § 6(a)(2) (1984); The Legal Fee Equity Act:
Hearing on S. 2802 Before the Subcomm. on the Constitution of the S. Comm. on
the Judiciary, 98th Cong. 4-5 (1985); Respondent's Br. 45-46.

   This 1984 effort to ban enhancements is only the tip of the iceberg. From
1982 through 1991, similar proposals were repeatedly introduced in the Senate,
and at least two subcommittee hearings were held, but none of these bills was
ever even voted out of committee. See S. 585, 97th Cong. § 722A(e) (1982); Legal
Fees Equity Act, S. 1580, 99th Cong. § 6(a)(2) (1985); Legal Fees Equity Act, S.
1253, 100th Cong. § 6(a)(2) (1987); Legal Fees Equity Act, S. 90, 101st Cong. §
6(a)(2)  [*14]  (1989); Legal Fees Equity Act, S. 133, 102nd Cong. § 6(a)(2)
(1991); 131 Cong. Rec. 22346-67 (1985); 133 Cong. Rec. 13556-63 (1987); see also
Attorney's Fees Awards: Hearings  [**26]   on S. 585 (and on Amendments to Be
Proposed by Senator Orrin G. Hatch) Before the Subcomm. on the Constitution of
the S. Comm. on the Judiciary, 97th Cong. 8 (1982); Legal Fees Equity Act:
Hearings on S. 1580, S. 1794, and S. 1795 Before the Subcomm. on the
Constitution of the S. Comm. on the Judiciary, 99th Cong. 2 (1986). n4

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


   n4 In other contexts, Congress has resisted aggressive lobbying by state and
local officials to limit enhancements. See, e.g., Municipal Liability Under 42
U.S.C. 1983: Hearings on S. 584, S. 585, and S. 990 Before the Subcomm. on the
Constitution of the S. Comm. on the Judiciary, 97th Cong. 550 (1981) (report of
National Association of Attorneys General) (proposing that "amounts awarded as
attorneys' fees should be limited by Congress to a reasonable hourly rate" and
not "awarded based on some 'benefit to the class' or private attorney general
theory"); id. at 104 (prepared statement on behalf of the National Institute of
Municipal Law Officers) (proposing a ban on enhancements).


- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -
 [**27]

   Opponents of enhancements tried a different tactic in 1991. They proposed an
amendment to the Civil Rights Act of 1991 that would have limited attorneys'
fees to 20% of monetary awards. See 137 Cong. Rec. 28871-80 (1991). This
approach also failed.

   By contrast, Congress has explicitly proscribed enhancements in other
contexts. In numerous statutory schemes, Congress has capped fees awards. n5
[*15]  Moreover, a provision enacted by Congress in 1986 to govern attorney's
fees for claims brought under the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act
explicitly states that "[n]o bonus or multiplier may be used in calculating the
fees awarded." 20 U.S.C. § 1415(i)(3)(C). Legislative history reveals that this
statutory language was intended to adopt a more restrictive approach than
permitted under Section 1988. See H.R. Rep. No. 99-687, at 6 (1986) (Conf.
Rep.), as reprinted in 1986 U.S.C.C.A.N. 1807, 1808; Respondents' Br. 18, 45.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


   n5 See, e.g., 28 U.S.C. § 2412(d)(1)(A) and (2)(A) (capping fees under the
Equal Access to Justice Act at $ 125 per hour "unless the court determines that
an increase in the cost of living or a special factor, such as the limited
availability of qualified attorneys for the proceedings involved, justifies a
higher fee"); 28 U.S.C. § 2678 (fees under the Federal Tort Claims Act limited
to 20% of an administrative settlement and 25% for fees in cases that are
litigated); 42 U.S.C. § 406(b)(1) (fees under the Social Security Act for
past-due benefits capped at the lesser of 25% of the award or $ 4,000); 22
U.S.C. § 277d-21 (fees under the American-Mexican Chamizal Convention Act
limited to 10% of the award); 48 U.S.C. § 1424c(f) (fees in claims regarding
land under the Guam Organic Act capped at 5% of the award); 50 U.S.C. App. §
1985 (fees under the Japanese-American Evacuation Claims Act limited to 10% of
the award).


- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -
 [**28]

   Congress's repeated consideration and rejection of efforts to eliminate
enhancements during the thirty-two years that Section 1988 has been in force
confirms that Congress intended to authorize these incentives to encourage
vigorous enforcement, and that it has never chosen to abandon this approach.

 [*16]  II. Federal courts have developed workable criteria that reserve
enhancements for litigation that substantially furthers Congress's objective of
vigorous civil rights enforcement.

   Cases that obtain far-reaching results or break new ground for civil rights
further the purposes of Section 1988 described in Part I.A supra by making a
significant contribution to the vigorous enforcement scheme envisioned by
Congress. Enhancements for extraordinary performance and results recognize that
if private attorneys do not have appropriate incentives to bring such cases,
civil rights laws may be under-enforced. Contrary to the arguments of
Petitioners and the United States, see Pet. Br. 50-51; U.S. Br. 22, courts have
developed manageable standards to distinguish the exceptional cases warranting
enhancements for extraordinary performance and results that further Congress's
[**29]  broad-reaching goals. n6

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


   n6 Some of the cases discussed below were decided prior to this Court's
decisions proscribing enhancements for contingency and certain other factors.
See, e.g., City of Burlington v. Dague, 505 U.S. 557 (1992). Nevertheless, the
reasoning in these cases supporting enhancements awarded for extraordinary
performance and results is still valid because the courts considered these
factors independently.


- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

A. Courts have properly limited enhancements to those cases that establish
important precedents or achieve broad relief that roots out entrenched
inequities.

   Courts have developed workable criteria to limit enhancements to the rare and
exceptional cases  [*17]  where attorneys have achieved results that further the
purposes of Section 1988 by promoting vigorous civil rights enforcement. See,
e.g., Hughes v. Repko, 578 F.2d 483, 488-489 (3rd Cir. 1978) ("We emphasize, as
did the Congress that enacted [Section 1988], that the district court should
[**30]  evaluate the fee to be awarded in light of the important substantive
purposes of the Civil Rights Act, 42 U.S.C. § 1982 (1970), upon which plaintiffs
relied."). Courts have found it reasonable to enhance fees in cases that set
important civil rights precedents or otherwise pave the way for future effective
federal and private enforcement; or cases that do not merely remedy an
individual case of discrimination, but also obtain substantial relief that ends
discriminatory policies of large institutions or roots out entrenched
inequities.

   1. When a civil rights lawsuit resolves unsettled legal questions or creates
a new cause of action, the effect of the decision extends beyond that case
through the creation of precedent, which furthers the development of the law,
creates a foundation for future litigation, and increases voluntary compliance.
See Pamela S. Karlan, Disarming the Private Attorney General, 2003 U. Ill. L.
Rev. 183, 201 ("A private attorney general whose activities produce precedent is
thus in some important ways more effective than a private attorney general whose
activities produce only local change."); Louis Kaplow, Rules  [**31]   Versus
Standards: An Economic Analysis, 42 Duke L.J. 557, 611-15 (1992) (describing the
costs to the legal system when judicial interpretation is delayed). When
attorneys succeed in obtaining such groundbreaking decisions, they have advanced
Section 1988's goal of vigorous civil rights enforcement.  [*18]  In these
limited instances, courts have awarded enhancements above the lodestar,
recognizing that these cases require the greatest degree of ingenuity, and thus
the hours that an attorney works are less likely to reflect the value of his or
her services. n7

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


   n7 Enhancements for precedent-setting results are different from enhancements
based on novelty or complexity, which this Court criticized in Blum, 465 U.S. at
898-99, on the ground that such factors increase either the number of hours a
lawyer must spend on the case or the lawyer's hourly rate and thus are reflected
in the lodestar. In some cases, the lodestar figure might fully account for
extraordinary performance and results, but truly precedent-setting cases like
Geier v. Sundquist, discussed infra, are often not merely the result of
additional hours or higher fees.


- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -
 [**32]

   For example, the Sixth Circuit found that a successful challenge to
entrenched segregation in Tennessee's university system was a "rare and
exceptional" case that could meet the high standard for an enhancement.  Geier
v. Sundquist, 372 F.3d 784, 796 (6th Cir. 2004). The Geier litigation included
the first holding by a federal appellate court that there is "an affirmative
duty to remove all vestiges of state-imposed segregation in institutions of
public higher education, just as there [is] such an obligation at lower
educational levels." Id. at 795; see also Geier v. Univ. of Tenn., 597 F.2d
1056, 1065 (6th Cir. 1979).

   In its 2004 decision regarding attorney's fees for co-counsel who litigated
Geier with LDF, the Sixth Circuit determined that the district court had failed
to consider sufficiently whether the results obtained in a particular phase of
the litigation warranted an enhancement. The Sixth Circuit observed that "[t]he
[*19]  legal principles advanced by the Geier Plaintiffs were pathbreaking and
of great social import." Geier, 372 F.3d at 795. The court further emphasized
the "exceptional [**33]  nature and national significance of this case" insofar
as it "steered the jurisprudence in a different direction" and provided the
impetus for "concerted" federal enforcement efforts, including litigation to
desegregate the systems of public higher education in four other states.  Id. at
796. Moreover, the groundbreaking legal principles established in Geier were
subsequently affirmed by this Court in United States v. Fordice, 505 U.S. 717
(1992).

   Geier thus contributed significantly to the enforcement of civil rights law
by clarifying the constitutional obligations of state higher education systems
and spurring additional enforcement efforts. On remand, the district court took
these factors into account and concluded that a 25% enhancement was "justified
and reasonable" given the "overall result obtained and the rare and exceptional
nature of the case." Geier v. Sundquist, No. 5077, slip op. at 10 (M.D. Tenn.
Jan. 21, 2005).

   In a similarly pathmarking case that provided significant guidance regarding
compliance with antidiscrimination law, the district court in Chrapliwy v.
Uniroyal, Inc., 583 F. Supp. 40, 45 (N.D. Ind. 1983), [**34]  awarded an
enhancement for "exceptional" performance and results under Title VII's
attorney's fees provision, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-5(k), which served as a template
for Section 1988. In Chrapliwy, the plaintiff class of over 500 female workers
at an Indiana factory obtained a substantial settlement in a  [*20]  Title VII
action challenging gender-segregated hiring and seniority policies.  583 F.
Supp. at 42.

   The settlement was prompted by the plaintiffs' separate administrative
action, in which the U.S. Department of Labor threatened to bar the factory's
corporate owner, then one of the federal government's largest contractors, from
future contracts, pursuant to Executive Order No. 11246, 30 Fed. Reg. 12,319
(1965), reprinted as subsequently amended in 42 U.S.C. § 2000e app. (prohibiting
discrimination by federal contractors).  Chrapliwy, 583 F. Supp. at 42-43; see
also Chrapliwy v. Uniroyal, Inc., 509 F. Supp. 442, 444-48 (N.D. Ind. 1981). In
awarding an enhancement, the district court emphasized the "impact of this
lawsuit on the Department of Labor":


     The [**35]  actions by the plaintiffs' attorneys forced the Labor
     Department to create a working enforcement system to implement
     Executive Order 11246, and police other federal contractors in their
     compliance with its procedures. This mechanism will continue to
     operate, vindicating the rights of other employees and effectuating
     the congressional intent behind both Title VII and the Executive
     Order.


 Chrapliwy, 583 F. Supp. at 45 (quoting Chrapliwy, 509 F. Supp. at 462). n8

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


   n8 The district court originally approved a larger enhancement. See
Chrapliwy, 509 F. Supp. at 462. The Seventh Circuit held that the district court
"carefully evaluated its reasons for allowing" the enhancement.  Chrapliwy v.
Uniroyal, Inc., 670 F.2d 760, 770 (7th Cir. 1982). But the Seventh Circuit
determined that the district court's lodestar calculation was too low and
ordered increases. Id. Due to this alteration, the Seventh Circuit remanded for
the district court to check for "possible overlaps" between the factors
encompassed in the new lodestar figure and the enhancement. Id. On remand, the
district court reduced the amount of the enhancement to account for overlap.
Chrapliwy, 583 F. Supp. at 45.


- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -
 [**36]

    [*21]  Also illustrative of this category of cases is Shakman v. Democratic
Organization of Cook County, 677 F. Supp. 933 (N.D. Ill. 1987), in which the
district court granted an enhancement equal to one-third of the lodestar because
it had "never presided over a case with greater significance or more widefelt
impact in the area of civil rights." Id. at 944-48. Counsel was able to "invoke
judicial protection of constitutional rights which previously had not been
clearly recognized by the courts"; and the litigation gave "rise to a new class
of equitable actions" to protect the "constitutional right[] to be free from
political coercion in public employment" and "resulted in substantial political,
social and economic benefits not only for members of the plaintiff classes, but
also for all who are affected by the public officers and entities named as
defendants in this action." Id. at 945, 947. n9

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


   n9 See also Rajender v. Univ. of Minn., 546 F. Supp. 158, 171 (D. Minn. 1982)
(granting an enhancement in a case that resulted in comprehensive policy reforms
"to ensure that the University of Minnesota is purged of discriminatory
employment practices"); Reynolds v. Abbeville County Sch. Dist. No. 60, No.
72-1209, 1978 WL 64, at *8 (D.S.C. Mar. 16, 1978) (granting a 10% enhancement
because the case contributed to "the elimination of discrimination by the
Edgefield public schools in faculty employment and assignment [which] will
produce benefits for all teachers, principals and residents of the county," and
"[t]he case also established precedent which will benefit faculty members,
present and future, in the jurisdiction of the Fourth Circuit").


- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -
 [**37]

    [*22]  2. Courts have also found it appropriate to enhance fees in civil
rights cases that achieve farreaching policy changes and root out entrenched
statutory or constitutional violations. As this Court has recognized, Congress
intended for fee-shifting provisions to promote broad, rather than piecemeal,
civil rights compliance. See Newman v. Piggie Park Enters., Inc., 390 U.S. 400,
401 (1968) ("When the Civil Rights Act of 1964 was passed, it was evident that
enforcement would prove difficult and that the Nation would have to rely in part
upon private litigation as a means of securing broad compliance with the law."
(emphasis added)).

   This Court's observations in Piggie Park--a case that was cited favorably in
the legislative history of Section 1988, see Senate Report 3; House Report
6--remain relevant today given the central role that private litigants continue
to play in the enforcement of civil rights laws. Cases that establish
broad-based relief vindicate the public interest by bringing large institutions
or government agencies into full compliance with the law, which benefits
similarly-situated plaintiffs and the public generally.

   Awarding [**38]  an enhancement on this basis does not conflict with this
Court's admonition in Blum that the "number of persons benefited" should not be
a significant consideration in calculating fees.  465 U.S. at 900 n.16 (emphasis
omitted). In the context of a class action, Blum held that an attorney should
not need enhanced compensation merely because the class includes a large number
of individuals. Id.  [*23]  ("Presumably, counsel will spend as much time and
will be as diligent in litigating a case that benefits a small class of people,
or, indeed, in protecting the civil rights of a single individual."). Blum did
not, however, consider the incentives that may be necessary to attract attorneys
to cases with sweeping public benefits; it addressed only the level of lawyerly
diligence required once a case has been filed.

   For example, a district court awarded a 50% enhancement for exceptional
performance and results in a class action that successfully challenged the
hiring and promotion practices of the Pennsylvania State Police, where racial
discrimination "was so entrenched that the Governor of the Commonwealth conceded
he could not eliminate it--and he had failed [**39]  in the attempt." Bolden v.
Pa. State Police, 491 F. Supp. 958, 966 (E.D. Pa. 1980). The court recognized
that the lawsuit resulted in "tangible benefits flowing directly to the
citizenry of the Commonwealth." Id. As a consequence of the case, "minorities
have access to employment in the Pennsylvania State Police on a
nondiscriminatory basis, and the citizens of Pennsylvania will have a
representative law enforcement agency that is not tainted by constitutional
illegality." Id.

   An equally far-reaching outcome was one of the key factors justifying the
enhancement in White v. City of Richmond, 559 F. Supp. 127 (N.D. Cal. 1982),
aff'd, 713 F.2d 458 (9th Cir. 1983). The plaintiffs in White alleged that
Richmond, California police officers routinely beat, harassed, and then filed
groundless charges against African-American residents. The lawsuit resulted in a
consent decree that required the police department to overhaul its policies
[*24]  on the use of deadly and non-deadly force, establish training programs
and counseling for all officers, permit an independent monitor to inspect the
department's internal affairs and [**40]  citizen complaint files, and provide
an affirmative action program for minority officers.  White, 559 F. Supp. at
130, 134. The Ninth Circuit upheld the district court's conclusion that the
comprehensive remedial scheme represented the type of "exceptional success"
warranting an enhancement.  White, 713 F.2d. at 462.

   Similar considerations have guided other courts in awarding enhancements for
outcomes that contributed exceptionally to civil rights enforcement, and
especially those that precipitated "fundamental change to a recalcitrant agency"
or institution.  Hyatt v. Apfel, 195 F.3d 188, 192 (4th Cir. 1999). n10 This
criterion has also been applied in cases in which LDF opposed the substantive
result for which the enhancement was awarded. See, e.g., Parents Involved  [*25]
in Cmty. Schs. v. Seattle Sch. Dist. No. 1, 551 U.S. 701 (2007); Meredith v.
Jefferson County Bd. of Educ., No. 3:02 CV-620-H, 2007 WL 3342282, at *4 (W.D.
Ky. Nov. 9, 2007) ("Regardless of one's view of the law or educational policy,
this case has changed the face of American jurisprudence.").

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


   n10 See also, e.g., DeHoyos v. Allstate Corp., 240 F.R.D. 269, 330-31, 334
(W.D. Tex. 2007) (awarding an enhancement for a successful challenge to a
racially discriminatory credit-scoring system where attorneys achieved
"extraordinary results," including a "change in the credit scoring formula, an
educational outreach program, multi-cultural marketing, [and] an improved
appeals process"); Morales Feliciano v. Hernandez Colon, 697 F. Supp. 51, 61
(D.P.R. 1988) (granting an enhancement because, inter alia, plaintiffs'
attorneys were "pioneers of the prisoners' rights movement in Puerto Rico" and
"[w]ithout their initiative, more than 8,000 citizens would probably still be
held under custody in violation of their basic constitutional rights"); Kirksey
v. Danks, 608 F. Supp. 1448, 1458 (S.D. Miss. 1985) (awarding an enhancement
where, inter alia, "this lawsuit was the one major factor causing the petition
drive and referendum election ultimately changing the form of government for the
City of Jackson").


- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -
 [**41]

   The instant case squarely meets this second criterion for awarding an
enhancement for extraordinary performance and results. As the district court
recognized, Respondents secured "sweeping relief to the plaintiff class" of
3,000 foster care children who alleged widespread constitutional and statutory
violations, and they did so through a consent decree that is both "comprehensive
in its scope and detailed in its coverage." Pet. App. 152-54 (reviewing the
decree's thirty-one outcome measures that seek improvement in different areas of
the foster care system). The district judge further concluded: "After 58 years
as a practicing attorney and federal judge, the Court is unaware of any other
case in which a plaintiff class has achieved such a favorable result on such a
comprehensive scale." Id. at 154.

   3. The three attorney's fees cases cited in the legislative history of
Section 1988, see Part I.A supra, are also consistent with the criteria outlined
above:

   Davis v. County of Los Angeles. In Davis, a class of Latino and
African-American plaintiffs prevailed on their claim that the Los Angeles County
Fire Department's hiring practices were racially discriminatory.  [**42]  A
sweeping remedial order provided "substantial and significant benefits" to the
class, including fair and equitable hiring procedures.  Davis, 1974 WL 180, at
*1. On a motion for attorney's fees, the  [*26]  district court enhanced the
lodestar figure by more than 13%, after considering the "excellent results"
achieved by the plaintiffs' attorneys. Id. at *2. n11

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


   n11 The Ninth Circuit affirmed in part the liability and remedial rulings.
See Davis v. County of Los Angeles, 566 F.2d 1334 (9th Cir. 1977). This Court
granted certiorari, but subsequently dismissed the case as moot.  County of Los
Angeles v. Davis, 440 U.S. 625 (1979).


- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   Stanford Daily v. Zurcher. After demonstrators injured several police
officers during a protest against Stanford University Hospital's firing of an
African-American employee, the Stanford Daily published photographs of the
incident. See William Trombley, Campuses Optimistic That Calm Will Prevail, L.A.
Times, Apr. 12, 1971, at [**43]  D1. A federal district court held that the
police violated the Fourth Amendment when they searched the newspaper's office
for negatives of unpublished photographs in an effort to identify the
assailants.  Stanford Daily v. Zurcher, 353 F. Supp. 124, 126-27 (N.D. Cal.
1972). On a motion for attorney's fees, the district court granted an
enhancement based in part on the extraordinary "results obtained by the
litigation," which set a new constitutional standard for searches of individuals
who are not themselves suspected of a crime.  Stanford Daily, 64 F.R.D. at
687-88. n12

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - Footnotes - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


   n12 Although this Court acknowledged that the district court's constitutional
analysis was pathmarking, it ultimately rejected such a "sweeping revision of
the Fourth Amendment." Zurcher v. Stanford Daily, 436 U.S. 547, 554 (1978). In
doing so, however, the Court did "not consider the propriety of [the fees]
award," id. at 553 n.3, and its decision does not disavow Congress's intent to
authorize Section 1988 enhancements where a similarly precedent-setting result
is obtained.


- - - - - - - - - - - - End Footnotes- - - - - - - - - - - - - -
 [**44]

    [*27]  Swann v. Charlotte-Mecklenburg Board of Education. This case, which
was litigated by amicus LDF and local co-counsel, involved "the largest
metropolitan school system which at that time had ever been completely
desegregated by order of court." Swann, 66 F.R.D. at 485. Ruling on a motion
from LDF's local co-counsel for attorney's fees after years of litigation
including a victory in this Court, see Swann v. Charlotte-Mecklenburg Bd. of
Educ., 402 U.S. 1 (1971), the district court did not expressly award an
enhancement; but, relying in part on the attorneys' "excellent" results in the
face of significant obstacles, the district court granted them more than double
the rate it identified as the minimum hourly fee charged by counsel appearing in
federal courts.  Swann, 66 F.R.D. at 484, 486.

   Enhancements in antitrust cases, including Arenson described in Part I.B
supra, also are consistent with these criteria. See 372 F. Supp. at 1352, 1358
(awarding an enhancement where "[a]n entire industry has been restructured" as a
result of the suit and the case "could well be of great instructive precedent
[**45]  in subsequent litigation").

   4. Federal courts have been careful to respect this Court's mandate that
enhancements for extraordinary performance and results should only be granted in
exceptional circumstances. Enhancements are uncommon, and courts have
consistently denied them for garden-variety discrimination claims brought by
individual plaintiffs. See, e.g., West v. Tyson Foods, Inc., No. 4:05-cv-183 M,
2008 WL 5110954, at *3 (W.D. Ky. Dec. 3, 2008); Baty v. Willamette Indus., Inc.,
985 F. Supp. 1002, 1008 (D. Kan. 1997); see also Lynch v. City of Milwaukee, 747
F.2d 423, 428  [*28]  (7th Cir. 1984) ("[P]ositive multipliers should be given
only in cases that are significant and where the quality of the attorney's work
is considerably above average. . . ." (internal citations and quotation marks
omitted)).

   Federal courts have thus consistently recognized the link between achievement
of the important objectives set out by Congress in federal civil rights statutes
and the practical reality that lawyers need incentives to choose cases that
challenge entrenched inequities and have the potential to produce groundbreaking
results,  [**46]  and then to advocate for appropriately wide-ranging relief.
See Vulcan Soc'y of Westchester County, Inc. v. Fire Dep't of City of White
Plains, 533 F. Supp. 1054, 1065-66 (S.D.N.Y. 1982) (finding an enhancement
justified to encourage private attorneys to take "cases such as the present one,
which succeed in accomplishing major changes in the hiring policies and
practices of municipal agencies, and which open up significant employment
opportunities to minorities").

B. The criteria that courts have used to award enhancements for extraordinary
performance and results are consistent with Supreme Court precedent.

   The criteria outlined in Part II.A supra are consistent with the guidelines
set forth by this Court's interpretations of Section 1988 and similar attorney's
fees provisions in other federal statutes.

   In Blum, this Court rejected a categorical rule that enhancements are never
permissible in cases of "exceptional success." 465 U.S. at 897, 901. Blum
stressed that it was not precluding consideration of  [*29]  "results obtained"
but rather establishing a strong presumption that results are factored into the
lodestar calculation.  [**47]  Id. at 900-01. That presumption may be rebutted,
but "only in certain 'rare' and 'exceptional' cases, supported by both 'specific
evidence' on the record and detailed findings by the lower court." Pennsylvania
v. Del. Valley Citizens' Council for Clean Air, 478 U.S. 546, 565 (1986)
(quoting Blum, 465 U.S. at 898-901). As discussed in Part II.A supra, federal
courts have appropriately applied these instructions to distinguish those rare
and exceptional cases for which results-based enhancements are justified.

   Federal courts' awards of enhancements for extraordinary performance and
results are also consistent with City of Burlington v. Dague, 505 U.S. 557
(1992) (denying an enhancement on the ground that the case was taken on a
contingency basis). In Dague, the Court was concerned that awarding contingency
enhancements would create incentives for attorneys to bring "relatively
meritless claims," which is "an unlikely objective of the 'reasonable fees'
provisions." Id. at 563. In sharp contrast, enhancements for extraordinary
performance and results create exactly the sort of incentives that [**48]
Congress contemplated: They encourage attorneys to choose and pursue cases with
strong factual bases that significantly further equality of opportunity and
other critical civil rights.

   The Court in Dague also worried that contingency enhancements would already
be reflected in the lodestar calculation.  Id. at 562-63. But in the rare cases
warranting enhancements for exceptional performance and results, the lodestar
does not always  [*30]  provide the appropriate incentives to attract competent
counsel to assert bold legal theories in challenges to entrenched discrimination
and other inequities. See, e.g., Sims v. Amos, 340 F. Supp. 691, 694 (M.D. Ala.
1972) (noting that a voting discrimination case, where "plaintiffs have
benefited their class and have effectuated a strong congressional policy,"
"clearly falls among those meant to be encouraged under the principles
articulated in [Supreme Court precedents endorsing attorney's fees for citizens
acting as private attorneys general]" (emphasis added)), cited with approval in
Senate Report 4 n. 3. Without incentives for attorneys to take on these types of
cases, civil rights laws will [**49]  not always be vigorously and effectively
enforced, contrary to the intent of Congress.

   Moreover, while the lodestar calculation typically reflects the skills and
experience that a lawyer brings to bear on a case, it is not determined based on
the type of case and relief the lawyer chooses to pursue. Cf.  Graves v. Barnes,
700 F.2d 220, 223 (5th Cir. 1983). The proper inquiry in determining an
enhancement for extraordinary performance and results is the value of the legal
services provided--more value is provided through broad-reaching relief. For
example, where a civil rights litigant secures an order or consent decree that
results in groundbreaking policy reforms, the outcome affects not only the
plaintiffs but also numerous other individuals who do not have to sue to obtain
relief on their own.

   In sum, Petitioners urge--without any basis in text, precedent, or
legislative history--a new Courtmade rule that would structurally
under-compensate  [*31]  civil rights litigants in key cases yielding the most
extraordinary results that significantly safeguard and enhance critical civil
rights. The Court should reject Petitioners' unsupported attempt to ignore
Congress's [**50]  considered judgment that the full availability of reasonable
attorney's fees is crucial to the vigorous and effective enforcement of federal
civil rights laws.

CONCLUSION

   For the foregoing reasons, as well as those outlined by Respondents, the
decision below should be affirmed.

   Respectfully submitted,

JOSHUA CIVIN, KRISTEN CLARKE, NAACP Legal Defense & Educational Fund, Inc., 1444
I Street, NW, 10th Floor, Washington, DC 20005, (202) 682-1300

JOHN PAYTON, Director-Counsel, DEBO P. ADEGBILE, Counsel of Record, MATTHEW
COLANGELO, KIMBERLY LIU, NAACP Legal Defense & Educational Fund, Inc., 99 Hudson
Street, 16th Floor, New York, NY 10013, (212) 965-2200

August 28, 2009
